Exercise six has an analysis part and a visualization part.
The analysis part is pretty straightforward.
You just have to take the correlation code from exercise five and repeat it over all of the transformer
blocks.
By the way, as you are implementing this analysis, make sure to soft code the number of transformer
blocks, because in this model it's 12.
But when we switch to the larger version of this model, it's not going to be 12.
Anyway, when you extract histograms for the correlation distribution within each layer, make sure
to use the same histogram bin boundaries across all of the layers so you can compare them directly in
a plot and also in an image.
So then you can generate results and visualize them in a plot that looks something like this.
Obviously, your plots will not have these big red boxes covering up all the fascinating findings.
So on this left plot, we have line plots corresponding to the histogram for each of the 12 transformer
block MLP layers.
Each color is a different line, and the color bar indicates the mapping between the color of the line
and the layer where that line or that histogram comes from.
By the way, there's some weird matplotlib color coding to get this color scale to work.
So if you have the plot but you're struggling with this little component of the visualization, then
feel free to just copy the code from the solutions file.
Okay, so here you're going to have 12 lines showing histograms of correlation coefficients between
activations of the neurons and the lengths of the tokens and a separate line with a separate color for
each layer.
So then this image over here shows exactly the same data, but visualized in a slightly different format.
So now over here, the y axis corresponds to layer and the color corresponds to the density.
In other words, the color of this image here corresponds to the height of the y axis in this plot.
So same data in both axes, but they show the data in different ways.
And you will find that sometimes one visualization or the other is more clear or more revealing.
I hope you enjoy creating these graphs.
I always enjoy working with matplotlib, even when it gets a little bit frustrating.
Anyway, now I will switch to code and discuss my solution.
Here I am looping over all of the layers.
Now notice that I'm not just hard coding the number 12 in here.
If I were to hard code the number 12, that actually would work for this model.
It would be fine, but it's better to soft code whenever possible.
So therefore I'm using model config layers.
And what do we do inside this for loop?
I get the activations as you've seen before, and I standardize them as you've seen before, and then
I correlate them for each individual neuron as you've seen before.
So in fact, all of this code is exactly copied from exercise five.
All I did was just put in layer number here and then all of these data.
So all of the individual correlations get stored in this matrix.
All scores which is layers by neurons.
Every layer of course has exactly the same number of neurons.
So this works in a one big matrix like this okay.
And then here I'm getting the histograms.
Here I define the edges for the bins of the correlation coefficients -0.8 to plus 0.8 correlation,
and then 81 steps in between them.
And then I create a hist counts this matrix where I'm going to store again all of the data for all of
the layers and for all of the bins.
Now remember that the bin edges here, this variable here, when you say numpy dot hist and you input
the bins here, this variable defines all of the bin boundaries, which means there are n minus one
actual bins.
And that is why I have the minus one in here.
Okay so run that.
Yeah it takes a second.
I think I've already even run it.
Okay.
And then here I'm plotting.
Here is the first plot.
I can actually show the legend here.
Uh, the first plot on the left will show all of the lines.
And I'm plotting all the lines in a for loop because I want to specify the color of each line to be
the layer index divided by the total number of layers.
Okay.
And then here is the image.
Here's where I'm creating the image over here.
And here's this funny looking code that you, uh, you use to create this color bar over here.
Okay, so that's about the code.
What do the results actually show?
So again here we see the x axis is the correlation coefficients.
What we looked at in the previous exercise was just one line over here showing the bulk of the correlations.
A little bit shifted to the left.
And now you see it for all of the transformer blocks.
So I'll discuss this one in a moment.
It's kind of an oddball sticking out.
But just you know, when we look at all of the layers all together, we see that in general there's
a pretty Consistent shift a little bit left of zero.
And again, the interpretation here is that the shorter tokens tend to have stronger activations in
MLP layers.
And why might that be the case?
Keep in mind that shorter tokens tend to appear more often in training text, so there's a little bit
of a bias introduced there.
Okay.
And then we have something weird happening here.
This is at the very first, uh, transformer block.
And this is the transformer block that is as close as possible to the embeddings, which means as close
as possible to the raw text.
So as we move through the, uh, through the large language model, each transformer layer, we get
further and further away from the original text.
But here we are very close to the text.
This is just one stop after the embeddings, vectors and the position embeddings vectors get added together.
And here we see a pretty qualitative shift.
Most of these neurons, not all of them, but most of the neurons in this first MLP layer are actually
correlating positively with token length.
So longer tokens get more activation.
So that is for all of the line plots over here.
And then we get over here to the image again.
Every row in this image here in this matrix is one line from this plot over here.
And the color here corresponds to the height over here, which is the density or the estimate of the
pdf.
And so we see all of the same dynamics, but some features are just a little bit easier to visualize
in this image compared to all of these plots.
For example, something that you notice is that the later transformer layers here have a much tighter
distribution compared to the earlier layers.
With this one exception here.
I'm not sure why this one is so unusual here, that this row here corresponds to this purple line here.
So you do see that here?
That the yellow lines, the most yellow lines are a little bit more shifted towards zero.
The distributions are a little bit more narrow.
So the correlations are basically closer to zero.
The interpretation of that is that by the time you get to the end of the large language model towards
the last couple of transformer blocks, the model is not really processing the current token anymore.
It's really transformed the current token into the A prediction for the next token.
So you will see this throughout lots of analyses over the next couple of sections that the later you
get into the LM, the less the processing is related to the current token, the more it's related to
the predictions about the next token.
This is the final exercise.
Now there isn't really any new coding to do.
You just import the 1.3 billion parameter version of this model and then rerun the entire code file.
Be mindful that this will take several minutes just to load the model, and if you're running it on
the GPU, then that one forward pass is pretty quick.
If you're running this on the CPU, then that one forward pass will itself take several minutes.
Now there are two goals for this exercise.
First is to make sure that your code still works when you use it in a different model.
Now, keep in mind that different companies and different families of models can have different internal
naming conventions, so it's certainly not the case that any code you write should work for every single
possible variant of every LM.
But it is good to have code that works for at least different model sizes from the same type and the
same research group.
And of course, the main purpose of this exercise is to compare the findings qualitatively against the
smaller version of this model.
So therefore I recommend that before rerunning the code, you take screenshots of exercises one through
six, or at least the later exercises, so that you can more easily compare with the larger model.
Okay, so enjoy working through this exercise and now I will switch to code and discuss the results.
The only code I had to change was here in this code cell.
I just commented these two lines and uncommented these two lines, and then I ran the whole script again
from the start.
Okay, so then of course this is different here we can see there are now 24 blocks, 24 transformer
layers instead of 12.
And you can also see that the embeddings dimensionality is larger.
It's now 2048, and that means that the MLP internal layers are different as well.
In fact, this is 8192 neurons in the MLP expansion layer.
And of course that number should be familiar to you.
That's the same as the number of tokens that we use.
And so that was another reason why I chose to have 8192 tokens, because now it's just going to add
a little bit of confusion, because when you're working with the analysis and working with the matrices
and indexing matrices, you really need to know.
You really need to be mindful of which dimension corresponds to tokens and which dimension corresponds
to neurons.
So that was part of the reason why I used exactly that number of tokens.
Okay.
Let's see The rest of the code is the same.
You will get some different results here.
So here with the sizes.
Yeah.
You'll get a different uh.
Not there.
Here you will get different sizes of the activations here.
Of course, we have more, uh, keys printing out of this dictionary.
And now here is the first place where we already start seeing some differences.
Remember that these histograms look nearly identical for the smaller version of this model.
So the analysis is the same.
The tokens are identical.
It's exactly the same data that we are importing and pushing through the model.
And the model is you know, it's also the model from the same exact company, the same org.
Eleuther.
Uh, it's just that the model now has more parameters and more layers.
And now we really do see a qualitatively different distribution of activations.
So the long tokens have this kind of more Gaussian looking distribution, and the shorter tokens, and
also the median length tokens look a little bit different.
To me.
This looks like there's actually two distinct distributions in here.
One would be a very tight distribution peaking at around minus one half or something.
And then there's another distribution here.
That's something that you could model with like a mixture of Gaussians.
But we're certainly not going to get into that here.
But the main point is just qualitative that the large model and the small model do not necessarily show
the same patterns of results, even at this fairly large, you know, level of granularity.
Okay.
So the rest of this code is fine.
You can see again, the number is different from what it was before because the neurons are different
of course.
But this number is the same as this number.
That is what we want to confirm.
Uh, let me see.
Now I'm just going to go down and write.
So.
Okay.
Now when you have this many, uh, line plots, you really don't want to have a legend.
That's why this was commented out in the beginning.
Okay, let's recreate that graph.
Okay.
So here we see that some features are the same as with the small version of the model.
And some features are a little bit different.
So we still do see this uh shift of the first layer, the first transformer block immediately after
the token embeddings.
That one is shifted to the right.
And as I mentioned, you will see repeatedly that lots of the intermediate layers kind of smoothly transition
from one layer into the next layer in terms of their characteristics and relation to token categories
and so on.
But there tends to be something qualitatively distinct going on in the very first layer, and also in
the very last or last couple of layers shortly before we get to the selection for the next token in
the sequence.
And you also don't see exactly quite as clearly.
Maybe I'll change the upper scaling limit of the color here.
Yeah.
You do see this pattern a little bit that the later layers still get tighter, their distributions get
tighter because the processing is less about the current token.
And it starts to become more abstracted and more about selecting the next token in the sequence.
And so actually, yeah, I guess that is a little bit similar to in the smaller version of the model,
although this, uh, compression was a little bit tighter and more localized to the later layers.
Remember that the concept of token length does not exist inside the model directly.
That is, models do not process tokens according to how many characters they contain.
The model just processes the tokens as integers as vectors of embeddings.
On the other hand, it is also the case that tokens with fewer characters tend to appear more often
in the training text, so the relationship between activation and token length is probably due to token
frequency and not length per se.
These kinds of third variable explanations can either be useful interpretations or confounds and flaws
in the research, so make sure that you are aware of these possibilities of alternative explanations.
Nonetheless, it's quite interesting to see that there are some striking qualitative differences across
the different layers, but not necessarily across all of the layers.
So that's a theme that you'll continue observing in mech Interp sometimes you will find that the earliest
layers and the latest layers are kind of off doing their own thing, and lots of layers in the middle
are strongly correlated with each other.
The last point that I'll make here is about the assumption of universality, which I introduced in the
videos earlier in the course where I discussed general concepts and criticisms of mechanistic interpretability.
Remember that in this context, universality means that the same principles observed in small models
are also present in large models.
Now, the analysis that you did here in this video were not a definitive case of supporting or disproving
that assumption.
But you can see that some of the macroscopic characteristics are not necessarily qualitatively the same
between small and large models.
Now, it certainly is possible that universality exists for some computational features of models,
but not for all features of models.